10 ideas to save money

Below you can read ten useful tips that will help you save money, whether for special projects, the education of your children, your retirement or family emergencies that may arise.

Record your expenses for a month

Saving money is not as complicated as it seems, but before cutting your expenses, you need to know exactly what your money is going for. 

To find out, write down your daily, weekly and monthly expenses for one month. You can do it in a mobile application or in a notebook that you carry with you in your purse. It is very possible that you will be surprised. 

Once you realize what you spend the money on, you can decide what things are necessary and what you can do without. That coffee that you buy on the way to work or the bottled mineral water that you usually drink, can add up to a considerable amount at the end of the year, which you could have saved yourself with a little planning. 

You can for example, always leave home with a bottle full of tap water or buying a thermos to bring home coffee to work. If you have a coffee machine in your work, another option is to wait until you reach the facilities of your job, to take the long-awaited coffee.

And how about that beautiful baby clothes you buy with your credit card? Think about the interest they charge you each month if you do not pay for all of the purchases. Do not think you can not enjoy your daily coffee or dress your baby with these fantastic fashion items. Of course you can do it! The important thing is to look for alternatives that allow you to save. Set yourself the goal of spending a little less and saving a little more each month. If you think about it that way, you may have more motivation to avoid unnecessary expenses.

Pay yourself first

The secret to turning savings into a habit is to give priority to you. This does not mean that you buy everything that catches your attention, but that you pay yourself every month just like you pay all your usual creditors. 

Set yourself a realistic long-term goal and then "pay" by keeping a fixed amount of money in a savings or investment account. Make sure you do it on the same day of each month (for example, every 10th day of the month). If you wait until the end of the month to see what you have left, you will probably find that you do not have much left.

The easiest way to do this is to schedule an automatic transfer of a portion of your salary, however small , from your salary account to another savings account, a pension fund or a savings account for your children. Your goal is to make saving a habit so ingrained that you can no longer imagine your life without it. At the end of each month you will have the satisfaction of knowing that you have managed to protect your future and that of your family a little more than before.

Plan your transfers in stages

Most banks allow you to choose the date for automatic transfer from your current account. Plan these dates so that you know that they will not transfer money the same day to several accounts. 

If you get paid every two weeks, schedule a transfer every two weeks. If you work on your own and the money arrives irregularly, plan two dates in the middle of the month, when you do not usually pay most of your accounts.

Reduce your debts

Liquidating your debts is one of the best ways to save money, because the interest you pay on most loans (especially credit cards), is much higher than what you earn in most savings accounts. So reduce as much as you can your debts on credit cards, loan to buy the car and any other debt you may have, in order to save much more. The only big debt that is reasonable to have for a long time is that of a real estate mortgage. 

Become your own loan agent

When you finish paying a loan, continue making monthly payments, but to you! Schedule an automatic transfer of the same amount from your salaty account to a savings account or investment fund.

Motivate yourself with a specific goal

Decide what you really want or need (a new sofa, a new cell phone, a vacation) and find out what it costs. Then set yourself a realistic goal, for example, give yourself six months to save enough. Put pictures of your goal in the closet or in your wallet. Every time you feel like buying some new shoes or buying your child one more toy, which you do not really need, look at the picture and ask yourself whether it is really needed or not.

Open a savings account that you can not touch

Save for larger expenses, such as buying a house or car etc make use of Fixed Deposit feature in your bank . These deposits do not pose any risk and offer a higher interest rate than normal savings accounts, but the money must remain as a fixed deposit for a certain period of time (if you withdraw it out earlier, you have to pay a penalty). That way, you can not touch it when you get tempted to buy something you do not really need.

Fill a jar with loose coins

Put a large bottle with a narrow mouth (so you can not put your hand) in a visible place, and empty there every night the coins you carry in your wallet. When the bottle is full, you can change the coins for meeting your expenes or for deposits. Sometimes, After a few months, this money can be enough to pay for a Christmas gift or membership in a gym, for example.

Save extra income

Every time you receive an extra amount of money, for example, refund, a payment that was delayed a lot, a bonus at work or a monetary gift, enter it into your savings account. Or, if you have debts, use it to pay off your credit cards and loans, or to make an extra payment on your home loan (to the principal money, so that the amount of interest you pay over the years is reduced).

Cut out fuel use

Fuel for vehicles is too much expensive these days and the less you use, the more you will save. If you can not buy a car that uses less fuel, try to drive less often. 

Take rides with other parents to pick up children from day care or school, or with coworkers to get to and from work. Whenever you can, walk between one place to another or use public transportation. And for your next car vacation, consider traveling to a nearby location. 

