The random access memory ( Random Access Memory , RAM ) is used as working memory of computers and other devices to the operating system , the programs and most of the software . In the RAM, all the instructions executed by the central processing unit (processor) and other units of the computer are loaded , in addition to containing the data manipulated by the different programs.

They are called "random access" because you can read or write in a memory position with an equal waiting time for any position, not being necessary to follow an order to access (sequential access) to the information as quickly as possible.

When the computer is turned on, the POST routine verifies that the RAM modules are connected correctly. In the case that modules do not exist or are not detected, most motherboards emit a series of sounds that indicate the absence of main memory. After that process, the BIOS memory can perform a basic test on the RAM memory indicating major errors in it.

Index
  [ hide ] 
1History
1.1FPM RAM
1.2EDO RAM
1.3BEDO RAM
2Types of RAM
3Nomenclature
4RAM modules
5Memory technologies
5.1SDR SDRAM
5.2RDRAM
5.3DDR SDRAM
5.4DDR2 SDRAM
5.5DDR3 SDRAM
5.6DDR4 SDRAM
6Relationship with the rest of the system
7Error detection and correction
8registered RAM
9See also
10References
History [ edit ]

 
Integrated 64-bit silicon on a magnetic core memory sector (late 60's).

 
4MiB of RAM memory for a VAX computer of the late 70s. The DRAM memory chips are grouped top right and left.

 
SIPP type memory modules installed directly on the motherboard.
One of the first types of RAM memory was magnetic core memory , developed between 1949 and 1952 and used in many computers until the development of integrated circuits in the late 60s and early 70s. That memory required that each bit be stored in a toroid of ferromagnetic material a few millimeters in diameter, resulting in devices with a very small memory capacity. Before that, computers used relays and delay lines of various types built to implement the main memory functions with or without random access.

In 1969, one of the first RAM memories based on siliconsemiconductors was launched by Intel with the integrated 3101 64-bit memory and for the following year a 1024- byte DRAM memory was presented , reference 1103 which was a milestone , since it was the first to be marketed successfully, which meant the beginning of the end for magnetic core memories. Compared to the current DRAM memory chips, the 1103 is primitive in several ways, but had a higher performance than core memory.

In 1973 an innovation was introduced that allowed another miniaturization and became standard for DRAM memories: the time multiplexing of the memory addresses . MOSTEK launched the 4096-byte MK4096 reference in a 16-pin package, 1 while its competitors manufactured it in the 22-pin DIP package. The addressing scheme 2It became a de facto standard due to the great popularity achieved by this DRAM reference. By the end of the 1970s, the integrated ones were used in the majority of new computers, soldered directly to the motherboards or installed in sockets, so that they occupied a large area of ​​printed circuit. With time it became obvious that the installation of RAM on the main form, prevented the miniaturization, then the first memory modules were designed like the SIPP , taking advantage of the modular construction . The SIMM format was an improvement to the previous one, eliminating the metallic pins and leaving some areas of copper in one of the edges of the form, very similar to those of the expansion cardsIn fact, the SIPP modules and the first SIMMs have the same pin distribution.

At the end of the 80s, the increase in the speed of the processors and the increase in the required bandwidth left the DRAM memories behind with the original MOSTEK scheme, so that a series of addressing improvements were made such as the following ones: :


 
SIMM format modules of 30 and 72 pins, the latter were used with integrated EDO-RAM type.
FPM RAM [ edit ]
Fast Page Mode RAM ( FPM-RAM ) was inspired by techniques such as Burst Mode used in processors such as the Intel 486 . 3An address mode was implemented in which the memory controller sends only one address and receives that address and several consecutive ones without the need to generate all the addresses. This is a time saving since certain operations are repetitive when you want to access many consecutive positions. It works as if we wanted to visit all the houses in a street: after the first time it would not be necessary to say the street number just follow it. They were manufactured with access times of 70 or 60 ns and were very popular in systems based on the 486 and the first Pentium.

EDO RAM [ edit ]
Extended Data Output RAM ( EDO-RAM ) was released to the market in 1994 and with access times of 40 or 30 ns supposed an improvement over FPM, its predecessor. The EDO is also capable of sending contiguous addresses but it directs the column that will be used while reading the information of the previous column, resulting in a deletion of waiting states, keeping the exit buffer active until the next one begins reading cycle.

BEDO RAM [ edit ]
Burst Extended Data Output RAM ( BEDO-RAM ) was the evolution of the EDO-RAM and competitor of the SDRAM, was presented in 1997. It was a type of memory that used internal address generators and accessed more than one memory location in each clock cycle, so that it achieved 50% benefits, better than ODE. It never came to market, given that Intel and other manufacturers decided on synchronous memory schemes that although they had a lot of MOSTEK addressing, they add different functionalities such as clock signals.

Types of RAM [ edit ]
The two main forms of modern RAM are:

SRAM ( Static Random Access Memory ), static RAM, static random access memory.
volatile
non-volatile:
NVRAM ( non-volatile random access memory ), random access memory nonvolatile
MRAM ( magnetoresistive random-access memory ), magnetoresistive or magnetic random access memory
DRAM ( Dynamic Random Access Memory ), dynamic RAM, dynamic random access memory.
Asynchronous DRAM ( Asynchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory , dynamic asynchronous random access memory)
FPM RAM ( Fast Page Mode RAM )
EDO RAM ( Extended Data Output RAM )
SDRAM ( Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory , synchronous dynamic random access memory)
Rambus :
RDRAM ( Rambus Dynamic Random Access Memory )
XDR DRAM ( eXtreme Data Rate Dynamic Random Access Memory )
XDR2 DRAM ( eXtreme Data Rate two Dynamic Random Access Memory )
SDR SDRAM ( Single Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory , simple data rate SDRAM)
DDR SDRAM ( Double Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory , SDRAM double data rate)
DDR2 SDRAM ( Double Data Rate type two SDRAM , double rate data type SDRAM )
DDR3 SDRAM ( Double Data Rate type three SDRAM , double data rate SDRAM type three)
DDR4 SDRAM ( Double Data Rate type four SDRAM , double data rate SDRAM type four)
Nomenclature [ edit ]
The expression RAM is often used to describe the memory modules used in personal computers and servers .

RAM is just a variety of random access memory: ROMs , flash memory , cache ( SRAM ), registers in processors and other processing units also have the quality of presenting equal access delays for any position.

The RAM modules are the commercial presentation of this type of memory, which consists of integrated circuits welded on an independent printed circuit , in other devices such as video game consoles, the RAM is soldered directly on the main board.

RAM modules [ edit ]

 
SO-DIMM format .
RAM modules are cards or boards of printed circuit having welded chips memory DRAM on one or both sides.

The DRAM implementation is based on a topology of electrical circuit that allows to reach high densities of memory by quantity of transistors, achieving integrated hundreds or thousands of megabits. In addition to DRAM, the modules have an integrated system that allows their identification before the computer through the Serial Presence Detect communication protocol (SPD).

The connection with the other components is made through a pin area on one of the edges of the printed circuit, which allows the module to be installed in a socket or appropriate slot of the motherboard, have good electrical contact with the controllers of memory and power supplies.

The need to interchangeable modules, and to use integrated from different manufacturers, led to the establishment of industry standards such as the Joint Electron Device Engineering Council (JEDEC).

DIP Package ( Dual In-line Package , double in-line pin package).
SIPP Package ( Single In-line Pin Package , simple in-line pin package): these were the first commercial memory modules, proprietary format, that is, there was no standard between different brands.
RIMM modules ( Rambus In-line Memory Module , rambus in-line memory module): They were other well-known proprietary modules, designed by the RAMBUS company.
SIMM modules ( Single In-line Memory Module , simple in-line memory module): format used in old computers. They had a data bus of 16 or 32 bits.
DIMM modules ( Dual In-line Memory Module , dual in-line memory module): used in desktop computers. They are characterized by having a 64-bit data bus.
Modules SO-DIMM ( Small Outline DIMM ) used in laptops. Miniaturized format of DIMM.
Modules FB-DIMM ( Fully-Buffered Dual Inline Memory Module ): used in servers.
Memory technologies [ edit ]
The current memory technology uses a synchronization signal to perform the read / write functions so that it is always synchronized with a memory bus clock , unlike the old FPM and EDO memories that were asynchronous.

The entire industry opted for synchronous technologies, because they allow the construction of integrated systems that operate at a frequency higher than 66 MHz.

Types of DIMM according to their number of contacts or pins:

Number of pins	Types of DIMM	Used by:	Observations
072	SO-DIMM	FPM-DRAM and EDO-DRAM	(not the same as a 72-pin SIMM)
100	DIMM	SDRAM printer	 
144	SO-DIMM	SDR SDRAM	 
168	DIMM	SDR SDRAM	(less frequent for FPM / EDO DRAM in work areas and / or servers)
172	Micro-DIMM	DDR SDRAM	 
184	DIMM	DDR SDRAM	 
200	SO-DIMM	DDR SDRAM and DDR2 SDRAM	 
204	SO-DIMM	DDR3 SDRAM	 
240	DIMM	DDR2 SDRAM, DDR3 SDRAM and Fully Buffered DIMM (FB-DIMM) DRAM	 
244	Mini-DIMM	DDR2 SDRAM	 

 
RAM memories with technologies currently used.
SDR SDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: SDR SDRAM
Synchronous memory, with access times of between 25 and 10 ns and which are presented in 168-contact DIMMmodules . It was used in the Pentium II and the Pentium III , as well as in the AMD K6 , AMD Athlon K7 and Duron. There is a widespread belief that it is called SDRAM to dry, and that the name SDR SDRAM is to differentiate it from the DDR memory, but it is not, simply the incorrect name was extended very quickly. The correct name is SDR SDRAM since both (both SDR and DDR) are dynamic synchronous memories. The available types are:

PC66: SDR SDRAM, operates at a maximum of 66.6 MHz.
PC100: SDR SDRAM, works at a maximum of 100 MHz.
PC133: SDR SDRAM, operates at a maximum of 133.3 MHz.
RDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: RDRAM
They are presented in 184-contact RIMM modules . It was used in Pentium 4 . It was the fastest memory in its time, but because of its high cost it was quickly changed by the economic DDR. The available types are:

PC600: RIMM RDRAM, works at a maximum of 300 MHz.
PC700: RIMM RDRAM, works at a maximum of 350 MHz.
PC800: RIMM RDRAM, works at a maximum of 400 MHz.
PC1066: RIMM RDRAM, works at a maximum of 533 MHz.
PC1200: RIMN RDRAM, works at a maximum of 600 MHz.
DDR SDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: DDR SDRAM
Synchronous memory, sends the data twice for each clock cycle. In this way it works at twice the speed of the system bus, without the need to increase the clock frequency. It is presented in 184-contact DIMM modules in the case of a desktop computer and in 144-contact modules for laptops.

The nomenclature used to define DDR-type memory modules (this includes the DDR2, DDR3 and DDR4 formats) is as follows: DDRx-yyyy PCx-zzzz; where x represents the DDR generation in question; yyyy the apparent or effective frequency, in Megacycles per second (MHz); and zzzz the maximum data transfer rate per second, in megabytes, which can be achieved between the memory module and the memory controller. The transfer rate depends on two factors, the data bus width (usually 64 bits) and the apparent or effective work frequency. The formula used to calculate the maximum transfer rate per second between the memory module and its controller is as follows:

Transfer Rate MB / s = (Frequency effective DDR) x (64 bits / 8 bits per byte) 4

For example:

1 GB DDR-400 PC-3200: Represents a 1 GB (Gigabyte) module of DDR type; with apparent frequency or effective work of 400 MHz; and a maximum data transfer rate of 3200 MB / s.

4 GB DDR3-2133 PC3-17000: Represents a 4 GB module of type DDR3; apparent or effective work frequency of 2133 MHz; and a maximum data transfer rate of 17000 MB / s.

The available types are:

PC1600 or DDR 200: operates at a maximum of 200 MHz.
PC2100 or DDR 266: operates at a maximum of 266.6 MHz.
PC2700 or DDR 333: operates at a maximum of 333.3 MHz.
PC3200 or DDR 400: operates at a maximum of 400 MHz.
PC4500 or DDR 500: operates at a maximum of 500 MHz.
DDR2 SDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: DDR2 SDRAM

 
Installed memory modules of 256 MiB each in a dual channel system.
The DDR 2 memories are an improvement of the DDR (Double Data Rate) memories , which allow the input / output buffers to work at twice the frequency of the core, allowing four transfers to be made during each clock cycle. They are presented in 240-contact DIMM modules . The available types are:

PC2-3200 or DDR2-400: operates at a maximum of 400 MHz.
PC2-4200 or DDR2-533: operates at a maximum of 533.3 MHz.
PC2-5300 or DDR2-667: operates at a maximum of 666.6 MHz.
PC2-6400 or DDR2-800: operates at a maximum of 800 MHz.
PC2-8600 or DDR2-1066: operates at a maximum of 1066.6 MHz.
PC2-9000 or DDR2-1200: operates at a maximum of 1200 MHz.
DDR3 SDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: DDR3 SDRAM
The DDR 3 memories are an improvement of DDR 2 memories, provide significant performance improvements in low voltage levels, which leads to a decrease in overall consumption expenditure. The DDR 3 DIMM modules have 240 pins, the same number as DDR 2; however, DIMMs are physically incompatible, due to a different location of the notch. The available types are:

PC3-6400 or DDR3-800: operates at a maximum of 800 MHz.
PC3-8500 or DDR3-1066: operates at a maximum of 1066.6 MHz.
PC3-10600 or DDR3-1333: operates at a maximum of 1333.3 MHz.
PC3-12800 or DDR3-1600: operates at a maximum of 1600 MHz.
PC3-14900 or DDR3-1866: operates at a maximum of 1866.6 MHz.
PC3-17000 or DDR3-2133: operates at a maximum of 2133.3 MHz.
PC3-19200 or DDR3-2400: operates at a maximum of 2400 MHz.
PC3-21300 or DDR3-2666: operates at a maximum of 2666.6 MHz.
DDR4 SDRAM [ edit ]
Main article: DDR4 SDRAM
PC4-1600 or DDR4-1600: operates at a maximum of 1600 MHz.
PC4-1866 or DDR4-1866: operates at a maximum of 1866.6 MHz.
PC4-17000 or DDR4-2133: operates at a maximum of 2133.3 MHz.
PC4-19200 or DDR4-2400: operates at a maximum of 2400 MHz.
PC4-25600 or DDR4-2666: operates at a maximum of 2666.6 MHz.
Relationship with the rest of the system [ edit ]

 
Diagram of the architecture of a computer.
Within the memory hierarchy , the RAM is at a level after the processor registers and the caches in terms of speed.

The RAM modules are electrically connected to a memory controller that manages the incoming and outgoing signals of the DRAM integrals. The signals are of three types: addressing, data and control signals. In the memory module, these signals are divided into two buses and a miscellaneous set of control and power lines. Together they form the memory bus that connects the RAM with its controller:

Data bus : are the lines that carry information between the integrated and the controller. In general, they are grouped in octets with 8, 16, 32 and 64 bits, which must equal the width of the processor's data bus. In the past, some module formats did not have a bus width equal to the processor width. In that case you had to mount modules in pairs or in extreme situations, of 4 modules, to complete what was called a memory bank , otherwise the system does not work. That was the main reason to increase the number of pins in the modules, equaling the bus width of processors like the 64-bit Pentium , in the early 1990s .
Address bus: it is a bus in which the memory addresses to which access is required are placed. It is not equal to the address bus of the rest of the system, since it is multiplexed so that the address is sent in two stages. For this, the controller makes timings and uses the control lines. In each module standard, a maximum size in bits of this bus is established, establishing a theoretical limit of the maximum capacity per module.
Miscellaneous signals : among which are those of the feed (Vdd, Vss) that are responsible for delivering power to the integrated. There are the communication lines for the presence integrated ( Serial Presence Detect ) that serves to identify each module. There are the control lines between which are the calls RAS ( Row Address Strobe ) and CAS ( Column Address Strobe ) that control the address bus, finally there are the clock signals in the SDRAM synchronous memories.
Some memory controllers and PC systems and servers are embedded in the so - called North Bridge ( North Bridge ) on the motherboard. Other systems include the controller within the same processor (in the case of processors from AMD Athlon 64 and Intel Core i7 and later). In most cases the type of memory that the system can handle is limited by the sockets for RAM installed on the motherboard, although the memory controllers in many cases are able to connect with different memory technologies.

A special feature of some memory controllers is the management of dual or dual channel ( Dual Channel ) technology, where the controller handles 128-bit memory banks, being able to deliver the data interspersed, opting for one or another channel, reducing the latencies seen by the processor. The improvement in performance is variable and depends on the configuration and use of the equipment. This feature has promoted the modification of the memory controllers, resulting in the appearance of new chipsets (the 865 and 875 series of Intel) or new processor sockets in the AMD (the 939 with double channel, replacing the 754 single channel ). The medium and high range equipment is usually manufactured based onchipsets or sockets supporting dual channel or higher, as in the case of the socket ( socket ) 1366 Intel, which used a triple channel memory, or using new LGA 2011 quad channel.

Detection and correction of errors [ edit ]
There are two kinds of errors in memory systems, faults ( Hard Failures ) that are hardware damage and errors ( soft errors ) caused by fortuitous causes. The former are relatively easy to detect (in some conditions the diagnosis is wrong), the latter being the result of random events, are more difficult to find. Currently, the reliability of the RAM memory against errors is high enough not to verify the stored data, at least for office and home applications. In the most critical applications, correction and error detection techniques based on different strategies are applied:

The technique of the parity bit consists in saving an additional bit for each data byte and in the reading it is checked whether the number of ones is even ("even parity") or odd ("odd parity"), thus detecting the error.
A better technique is the one that uses "self-check code and autocorrector" ( error-correcting code , ECC ), which allows to detect errors of 1 to 4 bits and to correct errors that affect a single bit. This technique is used only in systems that require high reliability.
In general, systems with any type of protection against errors have a higher cost, and suffer from small penalties in performance, with respect to unprotected systems. To have a system with ECC or parity, the chipset and the memories must have support for these technologies. Most motherboards do not have such support.

For memory failures, specialized software tools that perform tests on RAM modules can be used. Among these programs one of the best known is the Memtest86 +application that detects memory failures.

Registered RAM [ edit ]
It is a type of module used frequently in servers, it has integrated circuits that are responsible for repeating the control signals and directions: the clock signals are reconstructed with the help of the PLL that is located in the module itself. The data signals are connected in the same way as in the unregistered modules: directly between the memory integrated devices and the controller. Registered memory systems allow more memory modules and a higher capacity to be connected, without disturbing the signals of the memory controller, allowing the handling of large amounts of RAM. Among the disadvantages of registered memory systems are the fact that a delay cycle is added for each access request to a non-consecutive position and a higher price than non-registered modules. Registered memory is incompatible with memory controllers that do not support registered mode, although they can be physically installed in the socket. They can be recognized visually because they have a medium integrated, near the geometric center of the printed circuit, in addition to these modules are usually somewhat higher.5

During 2006, several brands launched systems with FB-DIMM memory that were thought to be the successors of the registered memory, but that technology was abandoned in 2007 since it offered few advantages over the traditional design of registered memory and the new models with DDR3 memory. 6
