HOW IS DRY SKIN DIFFERENT FROM DEHYDRATED SKIN? HOW TO TREAT IT?
We often tend to confuse dry skin with dehydrated skin , or rather, we tend to believe that they are the same pathology, and we are very wrong.
Dry skin develops when the barrier function of the skin can not be carried out effectively because there is an imbalance of water and lipids in the upper layer of the epidermis. Being poorly nourished, the waterproof barrier can not exercise its function of defense of the skin, so it begins to manifest discomfort as discomfort, stiffness ( especially after bathing or showering ), feeling of slight tightness and peeling, and, Sometimes, itching, inflammation and loss of elasticity. The skin looks pale and devitalized. In cases of very dry skin , the sensation of discomfort and tightness is more marked, the desquamation is more intense and cracks or fissures may occur. When you reach the end ofpreatópica xerosis, the skin becomes rough and rough, appear spots of extreme dryness and slight irritations. In addition, this type of skin is very prone to the appearance of eczema.

The dry skin is a skin type, such as combination skin or oily skin, ie, is a chronic each individual usually due to a genetic predisposition (innate dryness) permanent condition and, although it may be influenced for external factors (climatological, environmental, diseases or medical treatments).

Apart from people who have dry skin from birth, this type of skin is usually common in children and adults from 40 years, since in the maturity is when the sweat and sebaceous glands are losing their function . People who live in dry, cold or low humidity climates or whose jobs require the skin to be in constant contact with water are also prone to developing this type of condition. 
If the necessary care is not applied, dry skin can cause atopic dermatitis and, in extreme cases, can cause cracks or fissures that can become infected when opened.

HOW TO DISTINGUISH A DEHYDRATED SKIN FROM A DRY SKIN?
Unlike dry skin, dehydrated skin is a temporary condition that can occur in skins of all kinds at any time of life. It is a consequence of bad fixation and a loss of water, but with the correct care, it is a totally reversible state. It is characterized by a sensation of tight and rough skin, but in specific and localized areas, although sometimes peeling can also occur. 
Tips for caring for dry skin:

 If it is a persistent discomfort, you must go to the dermatologist to correctly diagnose if it is dry skin or dehydrated skin and thus be able to treat it properly. 
 If this condition appears suddenly, it will be necessary to assess whether there may be a cause that has caused its appearance , such as changes in the environment, activities that may contribute to dry skin, diseases or medical treatments. If a trigger is found, it should be treated, corrected or remedied as much as possible. 
 Drink between 1.5 and 2 liters of water per day. 
 For cleaning If the skin is dry or very dry, it is important that the cleansing agent be soft enough not to remove the lipids from the skin and not alter the skin barrier. The ideal is that personal hygiene products are not aggressive to the skin, that is, they do not carry detergents and if they are active, they enrich the natural hydration factor of the skin

The cleansing milk of all types of ANALINE skins, enriched with soy protein hydrolyzate, provides a delicate, pleasant and effective facial cleansing.

 Apply moisturizing and emollient treatments to soothe the skin and protect it. The advisable thing is to use specific products for dry skin that contain active ingredients such as: components of the natural hydration factor of the skin (urea or lactate) that retain hydration in the epidermal layers and are well tolerated, ceramides that repair the lipid barrier reducing the loss of moisture and glucoglycerol that helps distribute water in the deeper layers of the skin. It is important to apply moisturizing care on a regular basis, since, by avoiding the loss of moisture, they help us to hydrate the skin properly.

The most indicated is to use products without alcohol, without perfumes and without dyes to avoid possible irritations. 
To deeply nourish the dry skin and reactivate the internal hydration mechanism, the Nourishing Cream for normal and dry skin ANALINE is a cream with great power of nutrition and regeneration and, in addition, brings a feeling of comfort, flexibility and softness to the skin.

The Body milk of Rosa Mosqueta ANALINE is a highly moisturizing and regenerating body moisturizer that nourishes, restores the lipid balance of the skin and increases its resistance to external aggressions.

LECHE-LIMPIADORA-ANALINE body and cream nutri

 Do not spend too much time in contact with hot water . Change the bathrooms by showers and when washing the dishes use gloves, in this way you will also avoid contact with detergents. 
 Use garments made of natural materials (cotton or silk) and try to use a detergent without dyes or perfumes to wash it, as they are substances that remain on the clothes for a while and can irritate the skin. 
 Avoid dry air by spending less time outdoors and, when the environment is warm, use a humidifier inside. In cold weather use scarf, hat and gloves.

The dry skin is not a concern but a good cleansing and moisturizing, combined with these tips, they will help you avoid the factors contributing to its development and thus will reduce its impact on our quality of life.
